This Heroic 17-Year-Old Syrian Refugee May Now Compete In the 2016 Olympics

The path to the Olympic Games is a tough one for any athlete, but for Yusra Mardini, it has involved a lot more than two-a-day practices and grueling training. The 17-year-old Syrian refugee may compete as a swimmer in the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Olympics as part of the first ever team of refugees.

Yusra was a competitive swimmer in Syria, and even represented her home country at Turkey’s world swimming championships in 2012, but her athletic dreams got put on the back burner when she and her sister, Sarah, escaped the war-torn country, and almost died during the journey.

Yusra and Sarah were on a small inflatable boat, crammed with about 20 people, off the coast of Turkey when the engine died and the dinghy started taking on water. Though the two sisters knew how to swim, many of the other refugees on the boat did not, so Yusra and Sarah made the decision to get in the water, kick their legs, and push the boat toward shore. “It would have been shameful if the people on our boat had drowned,” Yusra told UNHCR, the UN Refugee Agency, in an interview. “There were people who didn’t know how to swim. I wasn’t going to sit there and complain that I would drown. If I was going to drown, at least I’d drown proud of myself and my sister.”

The girls were hoping the engine would re-start at some point, but it didn’t, and they (along with two other passengers) swam and pushed for three-and-a-half hours, until they reached the Greek island of Lesvos. Everyone on the boat survived. After their heroic act, Yusra and Sarah continued on to Germany, where they were referred to a sports club and met swim coach Sven Spannekrebs. Sven not only helped the girls gain official refugee status in Germany, but also took note of Yusra’s talent in the pool. “She learned really fast,” he told UNHCR. “After four weeks I said to her, ‘Our goal must be the 2020 Tokyo Olympics.’”

And then the International Olympic Committee (IOC) announced that it would allow displaced refugees to compete in the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio, and identified Yusra as one of the 43 high-level athletes who has a chance to participate. According to the UNHCR, if she achieves a qualifying time in the pool, she’ll be among 5-10 finalists announced in June, to represent the Refugee Olympic Athletes. And if she does go on to the games, Yusra said, “I’m going to make them proud,” referring to the millions of refugees around the world. “I want to represent all the refugees because I want to show everyone that, after the pain, after the storm, comes calm days. I want to inspire them to do something good in their lives.”

But her story and message aren’t just inspiring for other refugees. Yusra is living proof that it pays to persevere, no matter what your circumstances. “I want everyone not to give up on their dreams and do what they feel in their hearts,” she said. “Even if it’s impossible, even if they don’t have the right conditions, you never know what will happen, just keep trying. Maybe you’ll get a chance like I did. Or maybe you’ll make your own chance.”