Tripling Down: After Brussels, Obama Touts Bringing Syrian Refugees to U.S.

Just days after the ISIS terror attack in Brussels that left 35 dead, including four Americans, and hundreds more severely wounded, President Obama is again touting plans to bring a least 10,000 Syrian refugees to the United States.

Obama's continued tripling down on his open refugee policy is significant for a number of reasons. 

1) ISIS is using the refugee crisis and refugee stream to import fighters into western Europe and the United States.

2) A number of the ISIS attackers in Paris and Brussels were not only from the same terror cell in Brussels, but were also "refugees" from Iraq and Syria.

3) Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson and FBI Director James Comey admitted during congressional testimony last year that even with a two year waiting period, their departments cannot properly vet refugees coming from terror hot spots like Iraq and Syria.

“We can only query against that which we have collected and so if someone has never made a ripple in the pond in Syria in a way that would get their identity or their interests reflected in our database, we can query our database until the cows come home," Comey during testimony last year. "Nothing will show up, because we have no record on that person.”

The two brothers who carried out the ISIS suicide bombing at the Brussels airport had a criminal record, but didn't have a record of ties to terrorism before carrying out their attack.

Meanwhile, the State Department just sent another $20 million in aid for the ongoing refugee crisis pouring uncontrollably into Europe. 

"The United States announces $20 million to support efforts by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), and the International Federation of Red Cross/Red Crescent (IFRC) to respond to increased protection, shelter, and other lifesaving assistance throughout Europe, including in Greece, Western Turkey, and the Balkans," a release states. "This new funding brings the total U.S. humanitarian assistance for the regional response to the refugee and migrant crisis to nearly $44 million since the start of the crisis last year. Today’s announcement includes $17.5 million for UNHCR’s Regional Refugee and Migrant Response Plan for Europe, $2 million for IFRC’s revised Emergency Appeal for Greece, and $500,000 for UNFPA’s Initial Response Plan for Refugee and Migrant Women and Girls in South-Eastern Europe."