Seeking shelter: Russia’s refugees from eastern Ukraine, 2 years on

Two years since the start of the conflict in southeast Ukraine, RBTH looks at the experience of refugees and migrants from the region who are struggling to make a new life for themselves in Russia.

When Yulia Kachalova fled the small eastern Ukrainian town of Horlivka (in the Donetsk Region) for St. Petersburg 18 months ago with her husband and a small child, they found themselves alone in a city where they knew no-one.

They had decided to leave Horlivka after their house was shelled during the conflict between Ukrainian government troops and Russian-backed rebels that erupted in the region in 2014.

Once in Russia, Kachalova's husband found work as a builder. However, since he did not have all the relevant papers, he could not be hired officially and the employer paid him a pittance. The situation was complicated by the fact that there was an oversupply of refugees who were prepared to work for very little.

In order to help support her family, Kachalova began cooking "Donbass-style pizza" and Ukrainian borscht for take-away delivery. That was what the young refugee family lived on.

When the conflict in southeast Ukraine was in a "hot" phase, the Russian authorities made a lot of effort to help refugees from the region, who are overwhelmingly ethnic Russians: They provided them with housing and dispatched humanitarian convoys to the Donbass region on a regular basis.

However, since early 2015, these Ukrainian citizens have been living in Russia on the same terms as other foreigners: They are allowed to remain in the country for no more than 90 days out of every 180.

Furthermore, the refugees have been evicted from the flats that they were temporarily provided with upon their arrival. Now, in order to extend their stay, a Ukrainian national needs to apply for official status within their first three months in Russia.

"Getting official status in Russia is very difficult. We spent ages in the waiting lines,” Kachalova recalls. “We even had to stay the night there in order not to lose our place in the queue. As a result, practically everyone has to go back to Ukraine once every three months in order to get a new migration card on the border and not exceed the 90-day limit."