Brussels attacks are hurting refugees in Greece

The terrorist attacks in Brussels is making it more difficult for the Greek government to manage the refugee crisis, as more and more EU countries become reluctant to allow the arrival of refugees into their territories.

On Wednesday, Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras had a telephone conversation with NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg to complain about the poor results of NATO's operation in the Aegean Sea, initiated last month to discourage the influx of refugees and immigrants in the Greek islands.

NATO has been tasked to do reconnaissance and surveillance and to collect information and share this information in real time with the Turkish coast guard, the Greek coast guard and with Frontex to help manage the migrant and refugee crisis and cut the lines of illegal trafficking and smugglers.

NATO's widened mission in the Aegean Sea came after defense ministers of the 28-nation alliance on Feb. 11 ordered the immediate deployment of the three vessels in Standing NATO Maritime Group 2 to the Aegean, where smugglers have been bringing tens of thousands of migrants into Europe.

Yanis Varoufakis talks to CNBC in Abu Dhabi
Greece risks being refugee 'concentration camp': Varoufakis
However, NATO's presence does not deter traffickers, and the only factor that discourages migrants from boarding boats on the Turkish coast and heading for the Greek islands are the high winds and rough seas.
The latest official estimates, publicized Wednesday by the coordinating body on the refugee crisis, claims there are a total of 49,085 refugees currently in Greece.

According to this latest update, there are more than 3,800 refugees on the islands in the eastern Aegean Sea, most of whom are currently on Lesvos and Chios. After making their way to Piraeus, a total of 13,850 are currently in Attica and a further 2,933 in Central Greece. A total of 28,412 refugees have found their way to the north of Greece, with about 12,000 concentrated in Idomeni, at the border crossing into FYROM.

The latest figure is lower than the previously published estimates on Tuesday, which suggested there were 52,206 refugees in Greece. As expected, this shortfall has caused some concern.

The conditions in the northern Greek town of Idomeni are becoming increasingly worse, as NGOs temporarily withdrew from the temporary camps on Tuesday over security concerns.

"The situation is difficult. There is tension; the people are exhausted. They come to the infirmaries and shout they want to be first in line, they cannot wait," Antonis Rigas for Doctors Without Borders told CNBC. "There are groups of people shouting, 'We don't want food. We want the borders to open.' We are waiting for things to calm down to see what we will do. We have all reached our limits," he added.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees spokesperson, Babar Baloch, who left Idomeni on Tuesday after two refugees attempted to set themselves on fire, said he was concerned about the situation growing worse, because people are losing patience and there is growing tension.

Baloch commented that although Greek authorities are urging the refugees to leave the area, there are no places for them in the hospitality centers at Diavata and Cherso. Others want to return to Athens but have run out of money, he added.