Turnbull government accused of ineptitude as refugee visa scheme stumbles

One of the few paths to a life in Australia for asylum seekers appears to have been blocked amid claims the federal government has approved just a handful of temporary visas for which 2000 people have applied.
Labor has slammed the government's failure to process onshore asylum seekers as inept, and the Greens say the government never intended to follow through on the policy.
Australia Immigration Minister Peter Dutton's office refused to say how many SHEVs had been issued.
Australia Immigration Minister Peter Dutton's office refused to say how many SHEVs had been issued. Photo: Firdia Lisnawati
It has been 18 months since then immigration minister Scott Morrison said so-called "illegal" boat arrivals would not be granted permanent protection, as he sought to reintroduce temporary protection visas – a controversial Howard-era measure that Labor abolished in 2008.
Advertisement

The policy included temporary Safe Haven Enterprise Visas, or SHEVs, which would last five years and require refugees to work or study in regional areas. Mr Morrison said the move would fill regional job vacancies.
Some 2000 people have applied for SHEVs, but the office of Immigration Minister Peter Dutton refused to say how many had been issued.
The Refugee Council of Australia estimates around 20 visas have been granted, and Mr Dutton's office did not dispute this figure.
His office would also not say how many temporary protection visas had been granted, and the Refugee Council says this figure is also low - despite 1400 applications being lodged.
The SHEV was integral to Palmer United Party leader Clive Palmer supporting sweeping new migration and maritime laws, including new powers to detain asylum seekers at sea and fast-track processing that Amnesty International said returned refugees "to the hands of their torturers". Mr Palmer, whose senators voted for the changes, did not respond to request for comment.
If neither permanent nor temporary protection visas are being issues to asylum seekers, it leaves them languishing indefinitely in detention, facing an uncertain fate.
As Fairfax Media reported in January, the time asylum seekers spend in Australian detention centres has reached a record high under the Turnbull government as detainee processing times blow out.
A spokesman for Mr Dutton said processing of Safe Haven Enterprise Visas began in July "after NSW opted-in to the process".
He said Victoria and South Australia only opted-in last month and Queensland confirmed last week it would also take part, "clearing the way for numbers of SHEVs to be considered and granted", adding that the "assessment and checking process will take considerable time".
Labor immigration spokesman Richard Marles said the government's failure to process onshore asylum seekers was "a disgrace. It is leaving people in perpetual limbo".
"It is now the untold story of the Coalition government's ineptitude in handling those seeking asylum," he said.
Greens immigration spokeswoman Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said the government was "never serious" about issuing the visas, and crossbench senators had been "duped" into supporting the government's legislation.
"We should treat others in the way we would want to be treated and that means we should be offering proper, permanent protection to those in need," she said.
Refugee Council chief executive Paul Power said his organisation does not support temporary protection visas, and SHEV-holders would be moving to regional communities with few settlement services such as English language support.