South Carolina senate passes bill to require refugees to register with state

The bill, which also holds sponsors accountable for crimes or acts of terror, would make South Carolina ‘the most unwelcome state for refugees’, state senator said

The South Carolina senate passed a bill on Wednesday that would require refugees to register with the state and hold their sponsors liable if they commit an act of terror or violent crime.

The bill will now move on to the house. If ultimately passed and signed by the governor, it could become the first measure of its kind in the country. The chief supporter of the bill said the goal is to keep South Carolina safe from the kinds of attacks carried out this week in Belgium and recently in California and Paris.

“We can make South Carolina out of the 50 states the most unwelcome state for refugees,” said state senator Kevin Bryant, a Republican from Anderson.


Syrian refugees in America: separating fact from fiction in the debate
 Read more
Opponents of the bill said it didn’t fit South Carolina’s oft-mentioned Christian values, such as loving one’s neighbors. The National Conference of State Legislatures said South Carolina and New York are the only states that have proposed measures to register refugees.

“This may be the first time the legislature in South Carolina and the legislature in the state of New York are on the same page,” said Bryant, adding New York already has suffered from terrorist attacks.

South Carolina is in the middle of the south’s so-called Bible belt, with Republicans controlling both chambers in the legislature and the governor’s office.

The bill requires refugees resettled by the federal government into South Carolina to register with its department of social services. That agency would share the information with state police, who would be asked under the measure to confirm that the refugees aren’t security risks and report back to lawmakers.

The bill passed 39-6. Some Democrats supported the measure after Bryant agreed to remove a requirement that no state money be spent on refugees including funds to educate their children. Bryant also removed a provision that would make the registry public after many lawmakers worried that would threaten the safety of the refugees.