House of Lords votes to let lone child refugees come to Britain

Peers warn that government must act fast amid complaints about conditions endured by child migrants in Calais

The government has been defeated in the Lords as peers voted to allow 3,000 unaccompanied child refugees into the country.

Peers voted by 306 votes to 204, a majority of 102, to amend the immigration bill in order to require the government to let the children, currently in Europe, come to Britain.

They warned the government it must act fast to take in unaccompanied child refugees amid complaints from cross-party MPs that child migrants in Calais were enduring terrible conditions.

The vote came as three unaccompanied Syrian children, including one orphaned by war, arrived in the UK from the Calais refugee camp to be reunited with relatives.

Labour peer Lord Dubs, who proposed the amendment to the bill, said the step would protect children from exploitation, people trafficking and abuse. Dubs, who was rescued as a child as he fled the Nazis, called on the government to remember the spirit of the Kindertransport and take the lead in Europe in giving homes to child refugees traveling alone.

The amendment stipulates that “the secretary of state must, as soon as possible, make arrangements to relocate 3,000 unaccompanied refugee children who are in European countries to the United Kingdom”.

Save the Children estimates that there are 24,000 unaccompanied child refugees in Europe, and calculates that 3,000 would be the UK’s fair share.

Earlier in the day, Yvette Cooper, the chair of Labour’s refugee taskforce, and Conservative MP Heidi Allen, called on the government to do more to support unaccompanied refugee children in Calais, after meeting some of the estimated 450 unaccompanied child refugees living there in caravans and tents.


The stories you need to read, in one handy email
 Read more
They described their anger and frustration after meeting boys such as 12-year-old Kareem from Afghanistan, who told them he was exhausted after a night spent trying to hide in the back of lorries to get to England. “He wanted to keep hugging people, he wanted comfort. He has no one looking after him. He is about the same age as my son,” Cooper said.

They also met Majid, 17, from Syria, who has spent the past year trying to reach his mother and brother who are already in Birmingham. He showed them the scars on his hands from barbed-wire injuries incurred during his nightly attempts to board trains to get to England. He told them he was hoping to return to school and wanted to study to be a surgeon in England.