How Swedish real estate agents make money off Syrian refugees

Hot “post-war” homes — available now!

Swedish homeowners are taking the opportunistic real estate world to new heights — by greedily marketing pads to Syrian refugees.

Ads for abodes featuring “potential asylum accommodation” are popping up online, sparking outrage from human rights activists, according to The Local.

inRead invented by Teads
The real estate website Blocket.se features one ad for a drab $12,000 home that can “facilitate the process of starting asylum accommodation if desired,” according to the news agency Svenska Dagbladet.

But selling refugee real estate is a heartless way capitalize on people in need, blasted Christina Höj Larsen, immigration policy spokesperson with the Left Party.

“This is both outrageous and frivolous. People forced to flee their homes should not become a market for opportunists. They should be received with seriousness and long-term aims,” Larsen said.

She claimed Sweden should offer the refugee government housing to people forced to flee their war-torn homelands.

“The state should be responsible for for the procurement of things like modular homes … A state-driven solution such as this would be fantastic. At the moment, anyone can wheel and deal, which is going to be expensive and affect quality in the long term,” Larsen said.

But even migration activists admitted real estate agents are simply tapping into a potentially hot market.

“When you own certain kinds of properties it is not wrong to talk about what they can be used for,” said Emma Carlsson Löfdahl of the country’s Migration Agency.

“Maybe some people do want to profit from the refugee crisis, but there are also those that want to help. We should help the serious ones in order to solve the current housing crisis,”
Carlsson said.

Official housing for refugees can’t be run without government permission, health officials said.

“You can certainly sell a property saying that it can be used as asylum accommodation, but this does not mean that the buyer can open it without authorization,” Cecilie Holm of Sweden’s
Inspectorate for Health and Care.

The Swedish government has authorized similar housing in the past, said Administration Ardalan Shekarabi, Sweden’s Minister for Public Administration.