Judge denies Pence stay in Syrian refugees case; appeal continues
NIKI KELLY | The Journal Gazette

INDIANAPOLIS - Gov. Mike Pence lost another battle in his quest to block Syrian refugees from Indiana when a federal court on Tuesday refused to grant a stay in the case.

Last month, U.S. District Court Judge Tanya Walton Pratt issued a preliminary injunction on behalf of Exodus Refugee Immigration.

Pence immediately appealed and also asked that the injunction not be enforced during the appeal.

"Today’s denial of the stay motion by Judge Tanya Walton Pratt in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Indiana does not prevent or impede the State from continuing to appeal the Court’s Feb. 29 injunction to a higher court," said Bryan Corbin, spokesman for Indiana Attorney General Greg Zoeller. "That appeal will be heard in the U.S. 7th Circuit Court of Appeals in Chicago."

In late 2015, Pence directed Indiana state agencies to not pay federal grant funds to local refugee resettlement agencies, such as Exodus, for social services these agencies provide to the Syrian refugees they help resettle in Indiana.

That group sued in federal court, seeking a preliminary injunction that was granted. The ruling requires state officials to resume full grant payments to the nonprofit contractor, payments that had been partially and temporarily suspended by Pence in November over public safety concerns.

"The State’s conduct clearly constitutes national origin discrimination. Although the State says it has a compelling reason for doing so – the safety of Indiana residents – the withholding of federal funds from Exodus … in no way furthers the State’s case," Pratt ruled in February.

"In balancing the competing claims of injury, it is clear that Exodus and its refugee clients will be harmed by the State’s directive. When this is weighed against the near complete absence of harm to the State, it is clear that equity demands a preliminary injunction to issue."

It prohibits the state from taking any actions to interfere with or attempt to deter the resettlement of Syrian refugees by Exodus in the state, including by withholding from Exodus funds and services due Exodus and the refugees it serves.

Pence claims the federal government is not adequately screening war refugees from Syria.