Calgary Heroes: Building a new life for refugees

Everything changed for Sam Nammoura on September 2, 2015.
Like millions of others, he woke to find the news saturated with an image of three-year-old Aylan Kurdi’s body washed up on a Turkish beach. The toddler and his family were fleeing war-torn Syria, in search of sanctuary, and the photo of the aftermath was shared world-wide.
“I don’t know what happened, but, from that day, I’ve been going non-stop,” said Nammoura. “I was born in Syria, so the death wasn’t really a shock for me, but I said ‘enough is enough.’”
Soon after, Nammoura started the Syrian Refugee Support Group Calgary with two partners he met at a vigil for Kurdi. The organization collects donations of household items for the refugees to start their lives with – from food hampers to bed frames to clothing – and helps them practice English, get around town and find housing.
Citing the 90s movie, “Field of Dreams,” Nammoura said, “If you build it, they will come.”
Since December, approximately 1,500 refugees come to the organization for help, and 350 volunteers have offered their time.
“I think we are just the echo of a city that wanted to help,” he said.
“We always do something and expect something else in return, but not here – people just want to do it. There is no reward, they do this out of compassion, and that keeps you going because you really see what these people are getting from it.”

Nammoura came to Canada in 1997 “with lots of hopes and lots of dreams” and the plan to build a business.
Out of his 12 siblings, he is the only one to make to Canada. Three are left in Damascus and the rest are refugees in Europe.
“The whole family is shattered,” he told Metro on Saturday.
“As we speak, today, my family in Damascus is under siege, and they have been for eight days. I can’t do anything, and nobody else can. So maybe we learn how to live with those emotions by helping someone that’s already here. If you can’t help your own family, you can help someone else’s.”
Nammoura runs his own security business by day, and dedicates all his spare time to the Syrian Refugee Support Group. Fellow volunteers at their 5,000 square-foot warehouse describe Nammoura as tireless, adding that he works all hours of the night and will never abandon those in need.
“I want to help and I want to make things better for the Syrians coming here,” he said.
“But it starts to go beyond that. This is Canada, this is Calgary, this is our community. This country gave me so much – it allowed me to be myself and accomplish all my goals and dreams. This is my way to give back to Canada.”