EDITORIAL: More talk needed on refugees

While Thursday night’s Public Broadcasting Service panel discussion yielded valuable and pertinent information about refugees and immigrants in Wyoming, perhaps the most striking development is the mature realization that came out of the 90-minute event.

All who participated admitted: Wyoming isn’t ready to adopt a refugee resettlement program, even if it is federally-funded and there’s a global cry to “let them in.”

Bear in mind Wyoming is the only state in the union that currently does not have a government-sponsored refugee program. Had House Bill 47 made it to the Senate and passed, it would have called for the setup of an agency to manage this program. We shouldn’t attempt to run such a program if people aren’t ready for it.


But we must ask ourselves: Why aren’t we ready?

The panelists – former refugee-now-Gillette-teacher-of-the-year Bertine Bahige,  University of Wyoming law professor Suzan Pritchett, State Rep. Tom Reeder of Natrona County and retired U.S. Sen. Al Simpson – unanimously agree that while they would love to see such a program, it would be irresponsible to do so.

There is too much misinformation about refugees and immigrants.

There is inadequate vetting of potential move-ins.

There is a major downturn in the economy, negatively impacting the need for jobs.

And there’s the unfortunate feeling that some people just plain don’t want these people here. Just ask Bahige; he’s one of the state’s best math teachers, but he worries about receiving hate mail and school district patrons bent on driving him and his family out of the state.

While the room at the Heart Mountain Interpretive Site was full last week with those who supported the notion of assisting refugees and even welcoming them here, there was as much concern about those refugees who are automatically associated with terrorists.

We agree with Bahige, a refugee from the Congo, that without continued honest dialogue and increased understanding and open-mindedness, Wyoming cannot – and should not – move forward with a formal refugee plan.