EU-Turkey refugee deal – Q&A
European and Turkish leaders claim their ‘one in, one out’ deal will end the chaotic migration of refugees towards Europe. But key questions remain
 Refugees arrive from Turkey on the Greek island of Lesbos.
 Refugees arrive from Turkey on the Greek island of Lesbos. Photograph: Fotis Plegas G/Reuters
Patrick Kingsley Migration correspondent and Jennifer Rankin
Tuesday 8 March 2016 20.09 GMT Last modified on Wednesday 9 March 2016 00.55 GMT

What does the deal involve?
It sounds simple enough: one Syrian refugee on the Greek islands will be returned to Turkey and, in exchange, a Syrian asylum seeker in Turkey will be found a home in Europe.

The one in, one out scheme provisionally agreed by the EU and Turkey was hailed as a breakthrough by European leaders. But as well as the knotty legal and moral issues, a host of practical questions remain unresolved.

How many people would be exchanged? When would it start? These are just some of the questions EU officials hope to iron out ahead of an EU summit on 17-18 March.

The scheme would only apply to Syrians. Afghans, Pakistanis and other nationalities not deemed entitled to European protection could be sent back to Turkey under another aspect of the deal. But other groups, such as Iraqis, may have a better chance of being granted asylum in Europe.

How soon could it be implemented?
The deal has yet to be fleshed out, but full-scale implementation could take months – or may never happen.

An existing Greek-Turkish readmission scheme was agreed as long ago as 2002, but has yet to be fully enacted due to disagreements between the two countries. Legal challenges from individual refugees and international watchdogs will present similar obstacles to the deal with the EU.

Meanwhile Greece’s asylum institutions are only staffed at roughly a third of full capacity, according to local officials, which means the processing and return of such a large number of refugees would take time.

EU states would need to help Greece – but so far their facilitation of existing schemes, such as the failed EU relocation scheme, has been minimal, which does not bode well for future collaboration.