Marooned in Idomeni: despair as refugees find their way blocked

Syrians, Iraqis and Kurds plead with guards to be let into Macedonia, as bottleneck of 10,000 migrants in tents keeps building

Hope springs eternal. It is what keeps young men like Muzahmen al-Turki trekking to these muddy parts. It is what keeps young women like Aysla, with her children in tow, behind him. It is the force that propels them – like almost every refugee – past the shelters that come in the form of hastily erected camps, past the army barracks, sports halls and tent cities that would otherwise keep them in Greece. 

Hope is also what Europe’s politicians never considered: men, women and children, rucksacks on backs, blankets on head, walking purposefully through the wheatfields of northern Greece, pushing prams, pushing wheelchairs, putting one step in front of the other to get to Germany, the go-to country in the promised land of Europe.

On Wednesday the way forward lay behind a razor-wire fence built at a border that could have resembled Colditz if it were not for the chaos erupting around it.


Refugee crisis: EU allocates €700m in extra aid to cope with influx
 Read more
Beyond a moat littered with blankets, bottles and clothes was Macedonia, the tiny Balkan state where the transit route now stops. Troops, armed with teargas and plastic bullets, guarded its perimeter. Slovene and Polish forces stood next to them; water cannons, Humvees, armoured personnel carriers glimmered in the winter sun, while behind them all were the dogs – the latest addition to Macedonia’s reinforcement of its southern frontier.

At midday, dozens of Syrians, Iraqis and Kurds – many stranded at the border for more than a week – pleaded with Greek policemen to let them through. For the first time since Monday, when Macedonian authorities abruptly cut off access, some refugees were allowed to continue their desperate journeys north. By mid-morning, 170 had been granted permission, passing through a cabin that passes for the frontier checkpoint.

Among those imploring anyone who would listen was a heavily pregnant Syrian woman, Hiba Gniad, exhausted and hungry but determined to go on. “I am tired,” she said, explaining that she had left Damascus to join her husband in Berlin. “Please, it is very cold, please ask them to let me in, please, please help me.”