'Mediterranean Hope' Gives Second Chance to Refugees

BEIRUT—
Like the estimated 1 million other refugees smuggled across the Mediterranean last year, Mirvat Sayegh was desperate to escape the miserable conditions that all too often characterize life as a refugee in Syria’s neighboring countries.

With new moves being made to close European borders to refugees, her options had dwindled. But thanks to a new project named Mediterranean Hope, the 23-year-old has found another way of making the journey.

Her story and that of the project helping her are a boost to those who argue that new ways must be found to respond to a humanitarian crisis that grows worse each day.

Desperate circumstances

Having fled the violence of Aleppo in 2013, Sayegh and her family ended up in Lebanon, where they struggled to make ends meet. Her nephew, suffering from trauma, had stopped speaking.

“Life was very difficult. There was no work and I couldn’t carry on my studies,” she told VOA. “I was thinking that I would go by boat [to Europe] over the summer.”

That was when Mediterranean Hope stepped in.

Run by the Federation of Protestant Churches in Italy and the Community of Sant'Egidio — recognized by the Catholic Church as a public lay association — it offered Sayegh and her family a chance of resettlement in Italy.

The offer followed months of negotiations with the Italian government that were completed in December, with Sayegh among the first of about 1,000 refugees — 500 of whom will be Syrian — to be resettled in the next two years.

Travel costs for the new humanitarian corridor, which will provide routes from Lebanon, Morocco and Ethiopia, will be covered by partnering communities.

Nothing else like it

“This is an experimental project. There’s none other like this in Europe,” said Sara Manisera, a spokeswoman.

Traditionally, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees oversees resettlement, a process in which those who are deemed vulnerable can legally move to a country that has agreed to accept a certain number of refugees.

Currently, fewer than 180,000 places have been made available by countries through the UNHCR’s resettlement scheme.