Storytelling Renaissance Propels Indian Movie Hits Like 'Neerja' And 'Airlift'

If you haven’t seen any Indian movies in a while, or if you swore them off after fidgeting through a long, rambling, thinly-plotted Bollywood musical, now is a good time to give them another chance. A widespread focus on quality, sophisticated storytelling during the past few years has resulted in a rising tide of enjoyable and thought-provoking films from all across the sub-continent. The strength, diversity, and sometimes thrilling bravado of Indian cinema has never been greater.
Good stories have been good business for India, with new box office records having been set recently by such well-reviewed, crowd-pleasing hits as PK, Bajrangi Bhaijaan, and Baahubali: The Beginning. Each has earned a lofty IMDB rating of 8.2 or higher, and unanimous or nearly unanimous approval on Rotten Tomatoes. And each has collected at least 6 billion rupees ($90 million) in worldwide box office receipts; they are the only three Indian films in history to have achieved this level of financial success.

The three pictures stand as a testament to and microscosm of the tremendous diversity of Indian cinema. PK is a clever social commentary disguised as comedy, starring Aamir Khan as a childlike extraterrestrial who travels India asking innocent but subversive questions about God and religion. Los Angeles Times reviewer Martin Tsai called it “A biting, whip-smart satire on the thorny subject of organized religion… the Bollywood musical englightens and provokes through outrageous slapstick.” Bajrangi Bhaijaan is a heartwarming melodrama about a simple man with a big heart played by Salman Khan who takes a mute Pakistani girl back to her homeland to reunite with her family; it makes a gentle plea for greater tolerance and understanding across the India-Pakistani border. And Baahubali is a brawny, effects-driven action picture that offers a fresh and exciting modern take on classic stories from the Mahabharata and the Ramayana.

It’s not just big-budget pictures that have been succeeding lately. In fact, in recent months the most successful Indian films have been modestly budgeted sleepers like Airlift and Neerja that have far exceeded pre-release expectations to gross $18 million and $16 million respectively, earning windfall profits. Airlift, which stars Akshay Kumar, is a thriller focused on the evacuation of Indians during the 1990 Iraq-Kuwait war. Neerja tells the story of the courageous stewardess Neerja Bhanot (played by Sonam Kapoor), who saved the lives of hundreds of passengers during the hijacking of a Pan Am jet in 1986.