Real-life ‘Bernie’ who inspired movie on East Texas murder heads back to court

Bernie Tiede was released in May 2014 at the Panola County courthouse in Carthage. He was sentenced in 1999 to life in prison after being convicted of killing 81-year-old widow Marjorie Nugent for her fortune. (File Photo/The Associated Press)

From The Associated Press
Related

    Famous ‘Bernie’ case moves from one East Texas town to another
    Why are these Hollywood celebrities raising money for a cold-blooded murderer?
    ‘Bernie’ victim’s family wants killer back in prison

A funeral director in small-town East Texas befriends a widow 40 years his senior at her husband’s funeral, spends her money freely, then shoots her and hides her body in a freezer for nine months.

Bernie Tiede’s case could have been written for Hollywood — and when it was, the resulting attention got him out of a life sentence.

The real-life case featured in the 2011 dark comedy Bernie heads back to a courtroom April 6 for a new sentencing trial, two decades after Marjorie Nugent was killed.

Attorneys for both sides are under a gag order, but Austin lawyer Jodi Cole has suggested in recent court hearings that she will argue that Tiede was being used by Nugent to launder money.

The trial could take several weeks. Jury selection is scheduled to begin Friday.

Tiede was a mortician at Hawthorn Funeral Home in Carthage, a small East Texas town about 150 miles east of Dallas.
Marjorie Nugent and Bernie Tiede (Courtesy of Panola County Sheriff's Department)

Bernie Tiede and Marjorie Nugent met at her husband’s funeral in 1990 and became close friends. (Panola County Sheriff’s Department)

He and Nugent met at her husband’s funeral in 1990 and became close friends. They took lavish vacations abroad, and Tiede became known around town for the gifts he gave himself and residents — using Nugent’s money.

In 1996, Tiede shot Nugent four times in the back with a .22-caliber rifle, then hid her body in a freezer next to packages of frozen meat, pecans and corn. He carried on for nine months as if Nugent were still alive before authorities searched her home and found her body.

In his confession, Tiede described her as “evil” and asserted that he snapped under the pressure of her mistreatment.

After an initial mistrial, jurors in 1999 took less than an hour to convict him of murder. He received a life sentence but was released in May 2014 after his original prosecutor said he overlooked evidence that Tiede was abused as a child and may have deserved a lighter sentence.

Cole, Tiede’s attorney, argued he had been sexually abused as a child and felt trapped in a mentally abusive relationship with Nugent. A psychiatrist testified at a 2014 court hearing that Tiede probably had a “brief dissociative episode” when he killed Nugent.

Those arguments persuaded Danny Buck Davidson, the district attorney who originally won Tiede’s murder conviction and life sentence, to support Tiede’s release on the grounds that he should have been sentenced instead for murder as a second-degree felony, which carries a maximum sentence of 20 years in prison, not life.

After his release, Tiede went to live at filmmaker Richard Linklater’s Austin home. A judge has forbidden Tiede from speaking to the media.

A jury will ultimately decide whether Tiede, now 57, should go back to prison or go free. The trial will take place in Henderson, about 30 miles west of Carthage.

Davidson has been replaced by two lawyers from the Texas attorney general’s office.