‘Whiskey Tango Foxtrot’ brings a different approach to war movies



There’s a very different approach to a war movie in theaters right now with “Whiskey Tango Foxtrot,” based on a book written by former Chicago Tribune reporter Kim Barker about her experience reporting from Afghanistan and Pakistan in the mid-2000s.

First of all, it’s from the perspective of a journalist, rather than the military. But more importantly, it presents a lighter, sometimes comedic, approach to lots of very serious subjects. And in doing so, it clearly shows how frustrating the Afghanistan War has been for everyone involved.

The movie doesn’t really come through with any messages about the war. The screenwriter seems to have decided that just showing all these different issues — cultural differences that have the Afghans rejecting U.S. help, Sharia law and how women are treated there, soldiers feeling like the American public would rather forget about them, journalists’ reports being shelved because the viewers aren’t interested — displays how hopeless the situation is.

Tina Fey does excellent work as the star of a much more serious film than she has ever done before. She makes you care about her character and whether she will survive and what she will do with her life.

Her character, Kim Baker, is feeling unfulfilled in her job as a TV producer when she’s offered a chance to spend three months reporting from Afghanistan. She goes there not really knowing what to expect and not prepared for how exciting the adrenaline boost of living in a war zone can be. Three months becomes three years, and when she returns to the U.S., she is a different person.

Fey has explained the movie’s message this way: “People have been going to this part of the world trying to fix it for 1,000 years, and it is what it is. No one’s ever going to get a handle on (it).”

The movie depicts a lot of frustration — among the journalists, among the Marines, among the Afghans who really don’t want the Americans’ help.

This really is a “fish out of water” movie about an American woman in Afghanistan, spending all her time with Marines and other journalists and determining what she wants to do with her life. But she isn’t helpless. I appreciated the strength she showed once she went out with a Marine unit on patrol. She didn’t just duck and cover. She tried to film the action the Marines encountered. It shows her character as someone who can take care of herself, even though she hasn’t done anything like this before.

But what really bothered me was the watered-down danger she faced as a journalist embedded with Marines in Afghanistan. The movie does come up short in showing what it’s really like to be with the military in Afghanistan or Iraq. She never seemed to be in that much danger. She never even had a cut on her face.

A fellow journalist is kidnapped and then rescued. The experience was traumatic for him, but he didn’t even seem to be in that much danger when they found him.

When I tried to think of other movies I’ve seen about journalists reporting from a war zone, I couldn’t think of something. I found out about a 2002 HBO movie, “Live From Baghdad,” starring Michael Keaton, which sounds like a much more traditional approach to a war movie, but I wasn’t able to watch it this week.

Surprisingly enough, what “Whiskey Tango Foxtrot” did make me think of was the character April Kepner in the ABC television program “Grey’s Anatomy.”

Kepner is a doctor whose baby dies, and when she can’t deal with the grief, she jumps at a chance to go to the Middle East with the Army as a trauma surgeon. She also finds it exciting to be in the nonstop atmosphere of a battle zone hospital, saving soldiers’ lives. And she, too, goes for three months and ends up staying much longer.

Even when she goes home to see her neglected husband, she ends up deciding to go back to Afghanistan to help some more.

When she does come back to Seattle for good and returns to work at the hospital, she’s no longer the meek, uncertain-of-herself resident. She’s a take-charge surgeon who’s willing to take chances to help her patients — like she had to do on the battlefield.

I do love strong women characters in movies and on TV. Things aren’t going so well for April now that she’s back home to stay, but I like to think that Kim from “Whiskey Tango Foxtrot” came back a stronger, more self-assured and fulfilled woman who is comfortable with her new life.

Senior Editor Bette Pore spends her weekdays at The Independent, but if she’s not at work or home, chances are you’ll find her at the movies.

Bette Pore is a senior editor for The Independent.
