Batman v. Superman isnt a flop A superhero movie that questions absolute power is tailor-made for 2016

The reviews are in for “Batman v. Superman: Dawn of Justice”… and they aren’t good. It currently scores a 29 percent on Rotten Tomatoes and a 44 on Metacritic, with the general consensus being that it has a muddled and confusing plot, an over-reliance on special effects, and so many characters that it’s hard to feel emotionally invested in anything that happens on screen.

Yet despite this critical shellacking, “Batman v. Superman” is arguably resonating with audiences (emphasis on the word “arguably”). Certainly its record-breaking $166.1 million opening weekend indicates widespread interest and positive word-of-mouth, although its relatively low Cinemascore of B – on par with duds like “Catwoman” and “The Green Lantern” – suggests this initial enthusiasm may eventually cool into a tepid response.

Nevertheless, if we’re going to understand why “Batman v. Superman” has been so successful among moviegoers (at least thus far) despite the overwhelmingly negative critical response, it is necessary to examine the movie’s political message – or, more precisely, how that message has shaped audience perception of the film.

First, a word about the screening I attended, which fortunately for me had an audience which didn’t hesitate to loudly proclaim its opinions. When Superman complained to his mother that humans weren’t appreciating his services, someone behind me sarcastically muttered “Oh boo hoo.” Later on, when an anti-Superman protester spray painted “False God” on a statue of the titular hero, an elderly gentleman a few seats to my left muttered “Yep” and audibly gasped when the vandal was charged with terrorism and a hate crime. During a fight scene between Batman and Superman, a friend who joined me at the screening whispered, “How can Batman be a good guy? Everything he’s doing is motivated by hate.” Finally, as I left the theater, a little boy asked his mother who he was supposed to root for, since “both of them weren’t very nice at all.”

In short, this was an audience that didn’t just enjoy the film as an action-packed spectacle, but genuinely picked up on and appreciated its attempts at conveying deeper themes. Some may have loved the movie and others may have hated it, but there is no question that all of them (or at least the vocal ones) had strong reactions to its political subtext.

Yet what exactly was that subtext? If the critics are to believed, “Batman v. Superman” is only so much sound and fury signifying nothing. Alex Abad-Santos of Vox denounced it as “a stupidly beautiful, hollow movie,” Salon’s own Andrew O’Hehir wrote that Snyder “seems kinda dumb,” Adam Howard of MSNBC reassured fans that “a Trojan horse for fascism, it is not,” and Alyssa Rosenberg of “The Washington Post” insisted that “I’m all for looking for meaning in blockbuster movies, but those films need to work a lot harder than ‘Batman v. Superman’ does to earn the right to our consideration.” While most critics have commendably tried to play down accusations of a totalitarian or right-wing bias, they have generally done so by insisting that the film isn’t deep enough to have a coherent philosophy at all – a slap in the face to Warner Bros. and DC executives who, ironically enough, expressed concern that “Batman v. Superman” would flop because it was “too smart” for general audiences.

Given its bombastic and overly self-serious tone, it’s understandable that critics would be inclined to malign it, but their attitudes are a tad unfair. “Batman v. Superman” may lack the social commentary of “The Dark Knight” trilogy or bold iconoclasm of “V for Vendetta,” but it does have an ideology – namely, its distrust of power. To Batman and many residents of both Metropolis and Gotham, Superman is a self-appointed overlord whose complete unaccountability makes him an existential threat to humanity, regardless of his claims that he only wants to help. Indeed, the film opens by revisiting the controversial Metropolis fight from “Man of Steel,” one that many critics noted would have resulted in hundreds of thousands of civilian casualties, showing how the stupendous loss of life (and Superman’s callous disregard for it) motivates Batman’s hatred. Of course, in Superman’s eyes, Batman is nothing more than a vigilante, someone whose ability to operate above the law speaks not to his superior moral qualities but rather the corruption of a police department that refuses to prosecute him. And when we see Bruce Wayne branding criminals with the Bat logo, it’s hard to disagree with Superman’s assessment.