Movie Rewind - The Divergent Series - Allegiant is embarrassing mess

“The Divergent Series: Embarrassment” would have been a better title for the lazy, misguided, weak-womened mess of a third film in a series that doesn’t conclude for another year.

If anyone still cares by next summer.

From the studio that gave us the “Twilight” and “Hunger Games” franchises and also split those films’ finales into two parts unnecessarily, we now have “Allegiant,” which matches the name of the third and final book by young-adult author Veronica Roth.

But it’s “Part 1” of a two-part ending, and it’s half-baked and half-hearted.

The “Divergent” series began as the story of a dystopian Chicago, divided into factions designated for each individual’s personal virtues. Erudite = the smart people, Amity = peace lovers, and so on.

It seemed like an intriguing social experiment, and our focus/conscience was embodied by Tris, with the talented Shailene Woodley playing this “divergent,” a rare person with a brain that cannot be controlled as easily as those of the masses in this Orwellian drama.

But where she began to discover her own power and leadership skills in the first film, her vigor seemed to diminish in the second film, “Insurgent” from last spring, and with “Allegiant,” this hardly seems to be her story at all anymore.

For a film series that introduced audiences to a number of strong female characters in leadership positions, “Allegiant” now features some of the dumbest women you will see on film this year.

Tris is wishy-washy when it comes to making decisions and blind to the political/greedy machinations of multiple leaders lying to her face.

Everyone in the audience can see through these deceptions. Most people who cannot see could see through these falsehoods.

But not Tris, who’s not as bright as she used to be. She seems to be diverging from her past good traits.

Also changing for the worse is Naomi Watts as Evelyn, a once-promising leader among the public who, when given an option of decimating Chicago’s people in a power-grab, feels some guilt for about five seconds before sinning.

There’s also Johanna (Octavia Spencer), an Amity peace-keeper who’s now ready to wage war in what feels like an instant because none of these women is given any depth of characterization in what feels about as fresh as a CliffsNotes synopsis of Roth’s book.

That’s despite a two-hour running time for half of her final book. There are multiple moments, especially in the interaction between Tris and a new manipulator played by Jeff Daniels, that feel like dead air on a radio show.

It turns out that all of the male characters are more diverse and interesting in this women-powered series, and that’s likely the result of scripts written by all-men teams for the last two pictures.

These men don’t seem to know much about women.

The movie is such a bomb that even director Robert Schwentke, who helmed “Insurgent” and “Allegiant,” has recently dropped out of directing the 2017 conclusion, “Ascendant.”

That’s an ironic title for a series with little chance of making audiences feel anything other than sequel fatigue.

As for this film’s sketchy plot: Chicago has fallen into rioting-in-the-streets chaos, and Tris elects to go beyond the wall that surrounds the city that is the only home she’s ever known.

She’s joined by her beloved freedom-fighter, Four (Theo James), at her side, along with her traitorous brother (Ansel Elgort), their even more loathsome acquaintance, Peter (Miles Teller), and tough-minded gal pal, Christina (Zoe Kravitz).

They leave only to find “things are not what they seem” and that life does exist outside their city’s borders, with people just as divisive as those inside Chicago and resembling our modern leaders/politicians, which is to say that it all resembles history in general and this political season.

The special effects that power spaceships and computer-virtual reality systems is the best yet in the series and clearly the focus of filmmakers, rather than a coherent story that doesn’t feel like it comes to a halt for the purposes of grabbing your money again next year.

The action scenes are boring. The Tris-Four romance is heat-free. Jokes by the jerk played by Teller are groaners but welcomed amid this wasteland of a story.

As far as dystopian heroines go, “Allegiant” is in need of Katniss Everdeen showing up to firmly grab Tris by the shoulders and shake her while yelling, “Snap out of it!”

The “Divergent” series has lost its way, and it’s embarrassing.