Angelina Jolie’s Daughter Shiloh Makes Powerful Statement With Refugee Sweater

Angelina Jolie isn’t just known for her blockbuster movies, but she has also become popular through her humanitarian work, and it looks like her daughter Shiloh is also making a powerful political statement by means of wearing a seemingly simple sweater. Angelina jetted out of LAX on Monday together with her daughters Shiloh and Zahara, and son Pax. Shiloh Jolie-Pitt was spotted wearing a statement jumper that was printed with the words “Einstein was a refugee” over a collared shirt, trousers and comfy boots.

The nine-year-old girl’s shirt seems to suggest that she will follow the footsteps of her mother. According to Mail Online, Angelina is a Special Envoy for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Albert Einstien is one of the prominent refugees who have made a difference by moving from Europe to the United States after the rise of the Nazi party and anti-Semitism.

According to Hello Magazine, last June, Shiloh accompanied her mother to a visit a camp for the Syrian refugees in Southeastern Turkey, to mark World Refugee Day. She was also photographed on the set of Angelina’s new film “First They Killed My Father” that is based on Loung Ung’s memoirs about the regime of communist leader Pol Pot where around two million people died due to starvation, disease and executions.

This time around, it looks like UN Ambassador Angelina Jolie left the political statements to her daughter. The movie star opted to wear an all-black ensemble that included a pair of black trousers, oversized shawl that she wrapped effortlessly around her, boots and sunglasses. She completed her look with a light pink lipstick and blush. The Academy Award winning actress held Zahara’s hand while Shiloh and Pax walked alongside her. Zahara wore a black jacket over a light blue top, leggings and sneakers. While Pax sported a grey zippered hoodie, olive colored shirt and cream trousers.

Meanwhile, Angelina’s husband Brad Pitt is currently in England filming the sequel of World War Z. The couple are also parents to 14-year-old Maddox and seven-year-old twins Vivienne and Knox