‘Furious 7’ (With Movie Trailer) - James Wan Discusses Paul Walker and Narrates a Scene

With “Furious 7,” the director James Wan takes a break from the horror films for which he’s known (“Insidious” “The Conjuring”) to try pure action. In this video, he discussed an exhilarating, slightly crazy scene. Mr. Wan also touched on working with Paul Walker and finishing the film after Mr. Walker’s death in 2013. Here are excerpts from that conversation.

Could you talk a little about this scene?

The concept is that they’re going to be driving their muscle cars out of a huge military plane and parachute into enemy territory, so to speak, in the mountains of Azerbaijan.

Did this involve real cars or was it all visual effects?

We took actual cars in an actual plane and we flew up into the sky and we threw a bunch of vehicles out of the back of a plane. We had skydivers chasing after these cars and basically trying to get the shots for us. We used visual effects to help us in moments that were too dangerous for the skydiving cameramen to get.

What about the actors?

They’re obviously not thrown out of the sky. They’re in the safety of these really incredible rigs that my special-effects team built. We put them in there, shake them, turn them, roll them over to try and simulate the concept of the cars falling out of the sky.

Where did you shoot it?

We shot many of these scenes in Colorado, passing off for Azerbaijan, if you buy that. But the actual dropping of the vehicles out of the plane was done over the desert of Arizona. We dropped them over private property, so we could make sure there was no one down there and it was very controlled.

What was it like to walk into an already established film family for “Furious 7”?

They didn’t treat me like a second-class citizen, but obviously I was a bit anxious at first, wondering how they would take to me after having worked with [Justin Lin] on the last three movies. But to everyone’s credit, everyone welcomed me openly, from the studio to the producers to the actors.

Did they haze you?

No, they were very kind. But they did school me about the process of how these films are made. And it was a pretty intense schooling session because the original schedule was [to have the movie] to come out last year. And so I needed a crash course, no pun intended.

Can you talk about what it was like to work with Paul Walker?

Paul was the greatest guy I’ve had to work with and I am not just saying that. Truly up until this movie I, like everyone, enjoyed seeing Paul’s movies, but I didn’t think about much more than the movie itself. But then having met Paul and worked with him on set and hanging out with him in general, I just loved this guy. It affirmed for me that you cannot judge a book by its cover. He was the most down-to-earth and grounded person I’ve ever met. The best way I can sum him up was an accidental movie star. He [did not have] aspirations of Hollywood or making movies and that’s why he kind of never really committed to the acting world because his heart was always about getting back into nature. He loved the ocean. He loved animals. He was just so easy to work with.

After he passed away, how did you finish the film?

With a very heavy heart to begin with. For all of us it was very emotional to first come to terms with what happened. And then secondly, the reality hit us as to how we were going to finish the film without one of my lead actors. We took time off to re-evaluate the whole film, whether we could finish the movie at all because he was so integral and there were lots of moments that we hadn’t yet shot with him. But it was finally completed with a lot of soul searching. I have a big bag of cinematic tricks and boy did I exhaust every single one of them to make this work.

And his brothers stepped in, right?

It was actually three people. The two brothers, Cody and Caleb, and also another actor, John Brotherton. And so the process, which I won’t get into it too much, basically was these three guys doubling for Paul. Each of them have different characteristics and mannerisms that I wanted out of them that would fit what Paul could do. John Brotherton was a trained actor; so even if I didn’t use him for the actual shoot, I would still rehearse my scene with John, and then John would help me school [Cody and Caleb] and coach them. We also had an acting coach. It took a lot of people to make up Paul Walker.

What are you up to next?

In terms of filmmaking the next one for me is going back to do “Conjuring 2.”

You and Patrick Wilson (who has worked on the “Conjuring” and “Insidious” films) are buddies right?

Yes, Patrick and I get along very well. In fact, very early on, I tried to find a place for Patrick in “Furious 7,” but I couldn’t.

View a trailer for “Furious 7.”