Eye in the Sky - How Drones Are Changing War Movies

“Eye in the Sky” is a ticktock thriller in which the British military and government officials have hours to decide whether to order a bombing strike on terrorists in Kenya. Embedded within that suspense is the movie’s real point. It aims to present multiple views on the new realities of war—from the military, politicians and bystanders—in a world of drone technology and enemies who are ideological rather than geographical.

Movies and television shows increasingly grapple with those unprecedented aspects of war. Last year, the film “Good Kill” examined the post-traumatic stress suffered by a drone pilot ( Ethan Hawke) who was able to see his targets as people, close-up on his computer screen. On the television series “Homeland,” the CIA’s hunt for terrorists routinely includes high-tech surveillance and drone attacks. These new films and shows have to keep the action going in situation rooms full of computers, rather than in trenches and on battlefields. And they address moral and strategic questions that old-fashioned World War II movies never had to.
Director Gavin Hood, left, and actress Helen Mirren on the set of ‘Eye in the Sky’ ENLARGE
Director Gavin Hood, left, and actress Helen Mirren on the set of ‘Eye in the Sky’ Photo: Bleecker Street

In “Eye in the Sky,” opening March 11, the only villains are the terrorists. “Every [other] character in the film is someone I hope we empathize with,” despite their clashing views of how to eliminate the enemy, said the director, Gavin Hood (“X-Men Origins: Wolverine”).

Helen Mirren plays Col. Katherine Powell who from her base in the U.K., prepares to order the capture in Nairobi of two significant members of the terrorist group al-Shabaab: a Somali and his radicalized British wife. But a drone camera shows them moving to a location out of the ground forces’ reach. Another camera inside a miniature drone shaped like a beetle (and nicknamed Ringo) reveals the terrorists putting on suicide vests.

Powell’s request for permission to kill them before they can detonate the vests leads to a vociferous debate. If a bomb is dropped on the terrorists, there will be casualties in the surrounding village, which includes an 9-year-old girl selling bread on the street. But there will likely be many more deaths if they walk out and set off their explosives in a crowded area.
Alan Rickman in a scene from ‘Eye in the Sky’ ENLARGE
Alan Rickman in a scene from ‘Eye in the Sky’ Photo: Bleecker Street

As the clock ticks away in a situation room in London, the foreign affairs minister ( Jeremy Northam) and other politicians weigh the ethics and the public relations fallout of each option. How will civilian deaths play on YouTube and who will be blamed? Mr. Hood generates tension by cutting frequently to the scenes that everyone in the room is watching on computer screens—of the terrorists and the civilians who might become victims.

“When everybody’s got the same image of the battlefield, the politician might have a different agenda, might have to explain himself to the public in the morning,” said Guy Hibbert, who wrote the screenplay.

Alan Rickman, in his last on-screen movie role, plays a general supporting Powell’s request. (Mr. Rickman died in January; he has a voice role in the coming “Alice Through the Looking Glass.”)

Ms. Mirren’s role was originally written for a man. Mr. Hood, the director, suggested the gender change, allowing them to cast Ms. Mirren. “As an actress she’s got a really steely personality, which is right for the character regardless of gender,” Mr. Hood said. The change helped broaden the potential audience, so they didn’t end up with a war movie about and for a boys’ club.
From left, Phoebe Fox, director Gavin Hood and Aaron Paul on the set of ’Eye in the Sky’ ENLARGE
From left, Phoebe Fox, director Gavin Hood and Aaron Paul on the set of ’Eye in the Sky’ Photo: Bleecker Street

Making Powell female also puts women on opposing sides in the debate about the bombing. An undersecretary of state for African Affairs ( Monica Dolan) presents the most vehement case against the killing. Hers is an almost maternal voice insisting that the government cannot order a strike likely to murder a child, even if the terrorists claim 80 other innocent lives as a result.

Aaron Paul plays a drone pilot at Creech Air Force base near Las Vegas, part of the international operation. He queasily stands by to drop the bomb remotely, his first order to kill. Both the writer and director also wanted to include the perspective of the innocent bystander. Alia, the girl selling bread, is followed throughout the film. Behind closed doors, her father teaches her math and makes her hide her schoolbooks when gun-carrying members of al-Shabaab pass by. By the end of the film, Mr. Hood said, viewers “are very bonded to her.”

Mr. Hood, who is from South Africa but lives in Los Angeles, shot the entire film (including scenes set in the U.K.) in and near Cape Town to keep the budget down.

He recalled that the producers were initially concerned that a topical film might seem dated by the time it opened. But last August, after the movie was finished, the British military targeted and killed two ISIS members, British citizens, in Syria. Prime Minister David Cameron said the terrorists were planning attacks against the West.