James Wan hints there will be sea monsters in Aquaman's solo movie

I don’t know about you, but I may have gotten a bit giddy when I saw that 30-second cameo of Jason Momoa as Arthur Curry, aka Aquaman, emerging from that deep-sea wreck and looking like a complete badass in Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice with so little screen time. 

And no, I wasn't holding my breath during that underwater scene. If nothing else, it sure managed to whet my appetite to see more of the King of Atlantis in the upcoming Justice League Part One and his own standalone movie.

So, what will director James Wan have in store for us when Aquaman will rock those amazing tattoos and long locks on the big screen in his first solo film?

Over the weekend, Wan walked the press line at WonderCon where he talked about his upcoming horror movie, The Conjuring 2, and, of course, Aquaman. Speaking to /Film, the Furious 7 director revealed what real-life aspect he's looking forward to playing with in his comic-book movie, while applying his own horror film sensibilities.

“I think, like most people, we are familiar with Aquaman,” Wan said. “We grew up reading or watching this character on the peripheral. I was never so in depth with Aquaman as, let’s say, I was with X-Men. I grew up loving X-Men, Spider-Man and Batman. Those are obviously the key big ones, but there’s always something kind of cool about Aquaman still, the idea of creating a huge world that is on our planet. That’s the thing about Aquaman that’s cool is he’s not an alien, right? He’s from our planet and he’s from a society that we’re not privy to in the context of the story. Isn’t it crazy to think that we’ve explored space more than we have explored the depths of our ocean? That just fires up my imagination about potential sea monsters and cool creatures, that kind of stuff.”

So, will Momoa get to say: “Release the Kraken,” then? I for one can’t wait to see which monsters of the deep James Wan will conjure up with his take on the iconic DC Comics aquatic hero. Wan also promises his Aquaman will have a sense of fun, and even though the character will have been properly introduced in Justice League the year before, Wan implies Snyder won't have too big of an influence on his DCEU film. Speaking to CinemaBlend, Wan said:

“Well, I think the story that I would like to tell is still at the end of the day my story. And that’s what’s cool with Zack, is that he’s actually very respectful of that. He’s actually helping me out in some ways with certain things that he’s doing with his [films] so that I can have better groundwork with the standalone Aquaman story.”

So no more gloom and doom (one can always live in hope). Now, that’s something else to look forward to, don’t you think?

What sort of sea monster would you like to see when Aquaman swins into movie theaters on July 27, 2018?