What to expect from the ‘Wonder Woman’ and ‘Justice League’ movies

Spoiler alert! The following contains mild spoilers for Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice.

This weekend, in a climactic battle fans have been waiting years for, Batman and Superman at last faced each other on the big screen. There was Kryptonite and heat vision and an armored bat-suit and a very handy use of the name “Martha.” Although, to be honest, the real winner was the box office receipts. But Bat and Supes both got in a few good punches.

But that was this weekend. Now it’s time to move on.

Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justicewas just that: A dawn. It was the big tentpole movie Warner Bros. and DC Comics were betting on to launch their Cinematic Universe. And now that it’s here, it’s time to start thinking about all the other movies that are coming up in the next few years.

“Batman v Superman in its own way is a self-contained story, but also has links to what’s coming up,” producer Charles Roven told USA TODAY on the red carpet of the film’s premiere. “Probably more links to Justice League than to Wonder Woman. And then Justice League will have links to Aquaman and Flash and so on and of course, Justice League: Part Two.”

So in that spirit, here’s everything we could get the cast and filmmakers behind BvS to tell us about next year’s big entries into the universe, Wonder Woman and Justice League: Part One. (Although as long as they have Wonder Woman in them who cares about anything else, right?)
On Wonder Woman (June 23, 2017)

In Batman v Superman, we meet a mysterious woman who outsmarts Batman, has a mysterious photo of herself from decades ago and takes on Doomsday himself with a sword, a shield and a lasso.

Many fans clocked Gal Gadot as Diana Prince/Wonder Woman immediately, but despite her name recognition and popularity, her origin story isn’t super well-known (it involves a place called “Themyscira,” so work on that pronunciation before next year). Gadot told USA TODAY that the solo Wonder Woman flick will definitely get into the nitty gritty of her origins.

“It’s funny, I went through the opposite process,” she explained. “Because usually you start at the beginning and you end at the end. I started at the end. In the standalone movie, we’re going to go back in time and tell her coming-of-age story, her history, what motivates her, what drives her, how she became Wonder Woman.”

Confirmed producer Deborah Snyder, “You’re going to get a lot more information on her character and her history and where she came from.”

On Justice League: Part One (Nov. 17, 2017)

The filmmakers have one word to say about the upcoming superhero team-up film: Big.

“To think that we could make a movie that is bigger than the movie we just made...” Zack Snyder, who helmed BvS and will direct both Justice League installments, joked. “But Chris (Terrio, screenwriter) and I have been working on this amazing story for the Justice League, and I really feel like -- I know what happens and it’s crazy.”

Henry Cavill (aka Superman) was also pretty excited to get the Justice League cooking, at long last.

“I’m looking forward to expanding on the DC Cinematic Universe and finally getting a chance to open up that world,” the actor said. “There’s a thousand and one rich stories in there and I’m looking forward to interacting with Aquaman especially.”

Something else that might get bigger during Justice League? The pranks between Cavill and co-star Ben Affleck. “We’ve been quite tame actually (on BvS),” he admitted. “I think it’s probably going to get worse throughout Justice League. I think we’re going to start painting each other’s trailers and stuff I think.”

We kind of hope Batman and Superman prank each other, too.