Red Land Little League's story might become a movie

The story of Red Land Little League’s rise to the World Series had all the drama, excitement you might see on the big screen.

Now Jameson Hesse, an actor/writer/director is working to turn the tale into “Against the Odds.” He's recruited a team and is asking the public to donate $500,000 to make the film. In the first week, 53 people have donated more than $15,000 on the crowdfunding site, Indiegogo.

The team from Lewisberry, York County made news worldwide last year as they captured the national Little League championships and then the World Series. The team was the first from southcentral Pennsylvania to go to the World Series since 1990. The team lost to Japan 18-11.

“Our goal is to let everyone experience the dedication and the emotional rollercoaster ride these players, coaches and their legions of fans experienced on their journey to becoming the United States Champions,” according to the fundraising pitch.

“Moviegoers will see that even with a final heartbreaking defeat, the Red Land boy’s spirit, talent, sportsmanship and brotherhood left an unforgettable mark on the sport, the community and on their lives forever.”

Hesse played on the Red Land Little League baseball team as a child and will produce and direct the film.

Also on board are camera operator Ron Vidor (from movies like “Rocky III”), actor Peter Dobson (who played young Elvis in “Forrest Gump”), actor James Wilder (from "Melrose Place"), producers A.J. Ferrara and Tom Abraham and co-producers Joe Abraham and Jerry Jacobs.

The movie team will donate 15 percent of the profits from the movie to the team to build and maintain a new baseball complex.

Donors can give $10 and receive a digital download of the film, a portion of the script and an autographed team picture. There are other donation levels up to the $50,000 sponsorship which comes with the perk of executive producer and several appearances in the movie as an extra.

Fundraising will end in two months. If the money’s raised, the movie will be released next spring. If the goal isn’t met in time, all funds raised will be used for project development.