'Interstellar' - A Missed Opportunity - Movie Review

WARNING: Huge spoilers below.

I’m conflicted and annoyed.

On the one hand, I was impressed with Christopher Nolan’s “Interstellar.” It was an epic movie with wonderful visuals that attempted to bring some tough astrophysics to a general audience. It was an opportunity to showcase some real interstellar science in the public domain.

But the “Dark Knight Rises” director’s space adventure failed to deliver, even though I was trying to see past its scientific shortfalls.

Although there were science errors, that wasn’t the reason why I walked out of the IMAX theater dazed and confused. The movie's storyline, editing and script were clumsy at best.

ANALYSIS: ‘Interstellar’ Feeds off our Exoplanet and Wormhole Dreams

Matthew McConaughey’s acting was as to be expected; deep, emotional and well executed. As was Anne Hathaway’s character, Amelia Brand. In general, the casting and everyone’s acting was good. It was a movie with all the right elements. Michael Caine, playing Professor Brand (Amelia’s father), was even on hand to do physics and quote Dylan Thomas! I’ll never read Thomas’ work again without hearing Caine’s rendition of “Do not go gentle into that good night.”

We also got to know the characters’ histories, their family ties and enduring challenges. Some of the back story was overdone, but ultimately it was forgivable.

But those elements were as churned-up as the matter falling into a black hole’s accretion disk and even a team of Academy Award-winning actors couldn’t pull it out of the event horizon’s clutches.

“Interstellar” missed an opportunity to do brilliant science fiction. And that’s why I’m annoyed. It had potential, but that potential was needlessly squandered.

We Need to Explore

The story begins in the future on a dying Earth. There’s no time for space exploration, life on Earth is all about fighting disease, hunger and crippling climate change. The message is clear: If we stop exploring, we die, it’s that simple. In Interstellar’s future we stopped looking to the stars and we paid the ultimate price.

NASA has been driven ‘underground’ as a kind of secret organization — the public has zero tolerance for the ‘excesses’ of exploration, so Congress pretty much de-funded the US space agency. But it is still operating off the books, building rockets to save humanity.

So far so good, this was an obvious criticism of how NASA is funded; money is cut, projects canceled all because the critical importance of exploration is misunderstood by the government and public alike. Interstellar uses this ambivalence as its cornerstone and the IMAX audience cheered when engineer Cooper (McConaughey) shot down his daughter’s teacher for telling him the moon landings didn’t happen and the Apollo spacecraft were “useless machines.”

Although this message pervades the entire movie, things quickly started to get unbelievable.

OPINION: Interstellar Earth: The Future We See In Our Stars

Prof. Brand explains that humanity’s only hope is for Cooper et al. to launch on a rocketship through a wormhole, discovered 50 years prior, to explore a handful of potentially habitable worlds in a different galaxy. Cooper, you see, was a test pilot — the best NASA had — until he experienced a test flight accident and quit the space agency.

Immediately he has to say goodbye to his family, try to convince his sobbing daughter Murph that he’s doing the right thing and then, bye bye Earth! In the future, it seems, astronauts need no training or preparation for spaceflight.

The whole movie is fraught with these sudden discontinuities, leaving the audience asking the person next to them, “what just happened?”

Cryogenics

For example, as Cooper, Amelia Brand and crew hastily jumped on a spaceship to Saturn, we were quickly introduced to cryogenics. Awesome, cryogenics, a real piece of future science that we need to develop if we’re going to do multi-year interplanetary journeys. I felt happy, things were looking up.

Each of the crew slipped into their high-tech bathtubs where we are led to believe that they would sleep in for the 2 year transit to the ringed gas giant. But Cooper didn’t appear to go into cryosleep. Suddenly the spaceship Endurance arrives at Saturn, plus wormhole, and Cooper is still watching messages from home.

Did he cryosleep at all for the 2 year transit? Did 2 years even pass? We have to assume that he did hibernate, but there was no hint in the movie. Even a little bit of cheesy text at the bottom of the screen saying “2 years later” would have done the trick.

ANALYSIS: Cute Lemur a Boon for Long-Duration Spaceflight?

These editing discontinuities caused a jolt in my rising annoyance for the bizarre plot that seemed to shift in focus every 5 minutes. It only made the 3 hours drag. If this was a lesson in time dilation, I could feel it.

One bit of praise I do have for the movie is the realization that Earth gravity may be simulated through a spinning spaceship. We were treated to a wonderful, if dizzying, sequence when the Endurance ‘spun up’ and the crew suffered a bout of motion sickness as they quickly regained artificial gravity.

Wormhole Awesomeness

Then the crew arrived at the mouth of the wormhole; a beautiful CGI orb refracting starlight from the other galaxy. After a brief lesson about how wormholes work (another jolt as we realize Cooper is being given a physics lesson on Einstein-Rosen Bridges — shouldn’t he have been briefed on the physics of spacetime before launching to save humanity?), the Endurance races toward the wormhole and bang! Like ripping down from the apex of the biggest, most thrilling rollercoaster, we ride through the wormhole.

Forgetting the science for a moment, I genuinely enjoyed this part of the movie. It conveyed what a traversable wormhole could do in a way that was both understandable by non-physicists while making it a thrilling ride. The visuals were better than any Star Trek CGI set piece.

I know that traversable wormholes are at best improbable and I know that fitting a spaceship into one probably wouldn’t turn out so well, but this is sci-fi! Disbelief put on hold, all good, and wow, what a ride!

Sadly, my excitement was tempered again and again by a plot and a crew that wanted to philosophize about space, time and love. Does love know no bounds? Is it a multidimensional signal? Does love transcend space, time and black hole drama? According to Amelia Brand, sure! And sure enough, that emotion became the contrived backbone to Cooper finding his way home again. Egh.

Black Hole Badness

Then there’s the black hole.

I was so excited to see the black hole (or ‘Gargantuan’ as the crew called it), especially after all the hype of it being the most accurate black hole in movie history.

ANALYSIS: ‘Interstellar’ Black Hole is Best Black Hole in Sci-Fi

Unfortunately, Nolan decided to get a little loose with the physics at this point, which left me wondering: Why bother going into so much detail, even employing the help of Kip Thorne — one of the most famous black hole experts in the world — to create a scientifically accurate black hole when you’re going to run roughshod over the physics of basic planetary and orbital dynamics?