Deadpool Is Biggest R-Rated Movie Ever And Is About To Be Top X-Men Film

In the deluge of Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice Monday morning quarterbacking, that other 2016 superhero film went and did something remarkable. As of Sunday, Ryan Reynolds’s Deadpool has earned $745.7 million worldwide. That means it has eclipsed the $742m worldwide gross of The Matrix Reloaded to become the biggest-grossing R-rated movie of all time.

Oh, and with $745.7 million as of Sunday, it will presumably cross $747.9m today or tomorrow to surpass the worldwide gross of X-Men: Days of Future Past. That will make it, both domestically and globally, the biggest-grossing X-Men movie ever. And it did these things with an R-rating (duh), without 3D, and without the benefit of a China payday.

First, the R-rated stat. The film is indeed the biggest-grossing R-rated movie of all time on a global scale, surpassing the thirteen-year record set by The Matrix Reloaded back in the summer of 2003. That sequel earned $281.5m in America off a $134m Thurs-Sun debut, including a then second-best $91m Fri-Sun opening weekend.

And it earned another $460.5m overseas, which is still a record for an R-rated movie as of this juncture. Before a month ago, there had only been one other R-rated movie to even make $600m worldwide, namely Mel Gibson’s The Passion of the Christ which grossed $370m domestic and $611.8m worldwide twelve years ago.

That film is currently the biggest R-rated movie ever in America, and it will presumably remain as much. With $350 million domestic, the Ryan Reynolds superhero movie will surely catch Clint Eastwood’s American Sniper ($350.1m) today to become the second-biggest R-rated movie in America, but that top spot is out of reach.

And unless Deadpool 2 builds on this audience and/or goes 3D, I have to argue that we may never see an R-rated movie that out-grosses The Passion of the Christ in America. But nonetheless, the 20th Century Fox superhero action comedy has indeed displaced the second (and, best, natch) Matrix movie atop the global list of R-rated grossers.
Also of note, it will soon (if it hasn’t already) become the biggest-grossing X-Men movie of all-time worldwide. The current record holder, X-Men: Days of Future Past, earned $747.7m two summers ago, easily crushing the $457m global gross of X-Men: The Last Stand. But here’s the rub: Deadpool is about to out-gross that installment without 3D, with an R-rating, and without the $116m that the previous X-Men movie snagged in China.

Had the film played in China and converted itself to 3D, we’d probably be looking at the first $800m+ R-rated movie. Heck, with that 3D conversion, it may well have bested The Passion of the Christ in America. So if Deadpool 2 ends up going 3D here and abroad, I wouldn’t be too hard on them. I’m no fan of converted 3D (and I’m seeing more and more press screenings of 3D tentpoles presented in 2D), but you’re all-but-leaving money on the table.

Not that Deadpool needed 3D to do what it did. And lastly, of the seven comic book superhero films arriving in theaters this year, there is a halfway decent chance that Deadpool, friggin Deadpool, will end up out-grossing all of them in America.

Warner Bros./Time Warner Inc.’s Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice might get to $360 million, but that’s no guarantee at this juncture (and it’s not a flop if it merely ends up with $350m). Walt Disney’s Captain America: Civil War may play like an Avengers sequel, or it may play like a supercharged Captain America 3. That last trailer points towards the former, but don’t scream “Peril!” if the film ends up with $850m worldwide.

$250 million domestic would be a big win for Fox’s X-Men: Apocalypse. Days of Future Past earned $233m while The Last Stand made $235m in 2D back in 2006.  $200m domestic totals would be big wins for Paramount/Viacom Inc.’s Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows as the first one did $185m and wasn’t exactly universally beloved, although the trailers for this new one look much better.

A $200 million domestic total for Warner Bros.’ Suicide Squad would count as a win, especially if it is good and audiences like it. Ditto a critically-acclaimed/audience-pleasing Doctor Strange from Walt Disney. One or both could surprise, but looking at the comic book superhero landscape, it’s arguably down to “Can Batman v Superman top it?” and/or “Will Captain America: Civil War play more like The Winter Soldier or Iron Man 3?”

Now both of those things could happen, and Deadpool may have to settle for merely being the third-biggest comic book superhero movie of 2016 when the dust settles. But none of us realistically expected to be even having this conversation back in January of 2016.