Justice League And Other Upcoming DC Comics Movies - List Of Titles And Release Dates


Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice – March 25, 2016
As the follow-up to Man of Steel, Zack Snyder’s Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice is expected to set the table for the entire DC Cinematic Universe, and will do so by pitting Batman (Ben Affleck) against Superman (Henry Cavill), as well as Lex Luthor (Jesse Eisenberg), Doomsday, and others. The film will be deeply rooted in the events of the third act in the most recent Superman film, and will find Bruce Wayne seriously paranoid about the newly revealed Kryptonian, and strongly believing that he needs to be taken down before becoming an incredibly dangerous threat unlike anything Earth has ever seen.

In many ways, this is the lynchpin to everything that we will be seeing in the coming years – and everything that you’re going to be reading about from here on out. It should not only serve to establish the tone and general world that exists within the franchise, but there have also been many reports suggesting that it will introduce the latest live-action versions of some of the most iconic heroes in all of popular culture. Get the latest news and information about Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice HERE. And read our review of the movie HERE. 

Suicide Squad – August 5, 2016
Plenty of comic book movies have centered on heroes, but director David Ayer’s Suicide Squad is all about the villains. Based around the comic book series of the same name, the premise of the titular team is simple: extremely dangerous and incarcerated supervillains are given the opportunity to commute their sentences in exchange for performing in Black Ops missions that could easily get them killed. And from everything we’ve seen from the movie, the stakes definitely look impressively high.

While Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice will be doing most of the heavy lifting in the DC Cinematic Universe where heroes are concerned, it’s Suicide Squad that will introduce and reintroduce some incredibly iconic baddies to the big screen, including The Joker (Jared Leto), Harley Quinn (Margot Robbie), Deadshot (Will Smith), Killer Croc (Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje), and more. There is a real opportunity for the DCU to do some serious world building with this project – diving into the lead characters’ individual histories and various run-ins with super folk – and hopefully it will take full advantage. Get the latest news and information about Suicide Squad HERE. 

Wonder Woman – June 3, 2017
After once being attached to direct Marvel Studios’ Thor: The Dark World, Patty Jenkins is helming Wonder Woman - which will be the DC Cinematic Universe’s period film. Set during the years of World War I, it’s been rumored that the first big screen adventure for Princess Diana of Themyscira will both dive deep into her origins as a demi-god, but also her first experiences in the world of man. What’s unclear at this stage is how the film will ultimately connect with the larger DCU.

This will be the first Wonder Woman-centric project since the failed TV pilot that was made a few years ago with Adrianne Palicki, but obviously has a chance to make a major impact on the comic book movie world (especially because of its lead female character). Obviously Gal Gadot’s first performance as the character in Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice will give us a much clearer idea of what to expect from the upcoming solo movie – but it’s also worth noting that the film has the distinction of being the last solo movie before the big event title set to come out later in 2017: Justice League Part 1. Get the latest news and information about Wonder Woman HERE. 


Justice League Part One – November 17, 2017
Warner Bros. and DC Comics have been working for years to try and make a Justice League movie, and a few years ago even lined up an entire ensemble for a production that was to have director George Miller at the helm. Delays of a wide variety have prevented the project from happening, but the wait will soon be over. Thanks to the growing DC Cinematic Universe, we will soon see one of the greatest superhero teams of all time unite for the first time in live action on the big screen.

In late 2017, audiences will finally get to see the top tier heroes of DC Comics unite as the Justice League to take down an enemy threatening to destroy our world. The film will be the third in the growing cinematic universe to be directed by Zack Snyder, and though there hasn’t been any kind of official confirmation, it’s been suggested/rumored that the seven person line-up will include Batman, Superman, Wonder Woman, The Flash, Cyborg, Aquaman and Green Lantern. It’s been rumored that the villain that the team will be facing is the villainous alien ruler Darkseid, but nothing to this point has been said by the studio on that front. Get the latest news and information about Justice League Part One HERE. 