The making of Hardcore Henry, the craziest first-person action movie you’ll ever see

"You mind if I smoke?"

I’m sitting outside a trailer in Austin, TX, a few days into the South by Southwest film festival, talking with director Ilya Naishuller. There’s a relentless energy about the young Russian filmmaker in the Ray-Ban aviators; he leans forward intensely one moment, then jumps up the next to demonstrate what it was like to play a particular moment in his feature debut, Hardcore Henry. Naishuller never stops — and neither does his movie.

Hardcore Henry is somewhere between video game and cinematic dare: it’s an action movie shot entirely from the first-person perspective of its eponymous lead character, who wakes up in a strange lab with no memory and a series of cybernetic upgrades. From there things play out like the most insane Twitch livestream you’ve ever seen, as Henry fights, jumps, shoots, and maims, often with the help of a guy named Jimmy, played by Sharlto Copley (District 9, Chappie). It’s audacious, but for all the movie’s big-screen theatrics, it started with a single GoPro camera.

""Let's do something crazy. Call our friends, buy some pizzas, fall down some stairs.""

"I had bought a GoPro and I was snowboarding in Italy," Naishuller says. "I don’t know why I bought it. I’m a terrible snowboarder. I recorded how I fell and went five miles per hour. And I came back and watched the material, and I was disappointed in myself." He handed the camera off to a friend with some parkour skills, and after seeing that footage, Naishuller had an idea: use the camera to make a video for his band, the Russian punk act Biting Elbows. "I said to the band, let’s just do something crazy. Call our friends, buy some pizzas, fall down some stairs. Maybe we’ll get something interesting." The result was "The Stampede," in which a heist gone wrong leads to a series of first-person fights and battles. The video racked up millions of views.

For his follow-up, Naishuller wanted to go a step further, making a bigger, bloodier, and even more violent take on the concept. Made in concert with Neft Vodka (a bottle serves as convenient disinfectant in the spot), "Bad Motherfucker" blew up online. It racked up more than 32 million views on YouTube, but across Facebook and other platforms, Naishuller says the true number is closer to 120 million. After releasing the video Naishuller got a Facebook message from Russian film icon Timur Bekmambetov, who had seen the clip online and wanted to know if the musician-turned-director had ever thought of making a feature-length version.